Expand trusted types guidance (#37917)
mdn/content: files/en-us/web/api/trusted_types_api/index.md

  - {{domxref("TrustedScriptURL")}} is for passing to a sink that will parse the data as a URL.

With this API, instead of passing a string to an injection sink like `innerHTML`, you use a `TrustedTypePolicy` to create a `TrustedHTML` object from the string, then pass that into the sink, and can be sure that the string has been passed through a sanitization function.

Note that the Trusted Types API does _not_ itself include a sanitization function: you supply your own function when you define the `TrustedTypePolicy` that you will use.

For example, this code creates a `TrustedTypePolicy` that can create `TrustedHTML` objects by sanitizing the input strings with the [DOMPurify](https://github.com/cure53/DOMPurify) library:

```js
const policy = trustedTypes.createPolicy("my-policy", {
  createHTML: (input) => DOMPurify.sanitize(input),
});
```

Next, you can use this `policy` object to create a `TrustedHTML` object, and pass that object into the injection sink:

```js
const userInput = "I might be XSS";
const element = document.querySelector("#container");

const trustedHTML = policy.createHTML(userInput);
element.innerHTML = trustedHTML;
```

> 

Reviewer: There is one other thing it would be good to mention here, and that is default policy, which I would pull out of the `createPolicy` docs. 

At least for the Document.write() method, the spec says that IFF CSP is enforced then any strings passed to injection sink (or at least write()) will be offered to the default policy, and only if that default policy doesn't exist is there a TypeError. The idea is that you log this default policy, and eventually end up with everything migrated. 

IF you don't do it, then I'll have a go after this merges.

Reviewer 2: I think the default policy has a couple other uses in the way we've used them in production-- such as allowlisting a series of known constants, for example. Also important to note is that if we return `null` or `undefined` from the [default policy](https://www.w3.org/TR/trusted-types/#default-policy-hdr), we will not end up transforming the string into a `TrustedHTML`/`TrustedScript`/`TrustedScriptURL`, so we will end up blocking the potential XSS execution and with the `TypeError`.

This is useful, as @hamishwillee mentioned, for using the default policy as a logging/observability mechanism of everything that will end up in a DOM sink without going through another policy first.

Author: I've added something on the default policy in https://github.com/mdn/content/pull/37917/commits/c76c3db477f7dc0bd01b155576c6712d4e143a24. I didn't keep the warning about making sure the default policy isn't too lax, because I don't really understand why this applies to the default policy and not to any other policy. I'm probably missing something though.

I also did not talk about:

> I think the default policy has a couple other uses in the way we've used them in production-- such as allowlisting a series of known constants, for example

...because as I read it, using the default policy for anything other than transitioning to using trusted types fully is discouraged (see the first note under https://www.w3.org/TR/trusted-types/#default-policy-hdr).

Reviewer: I've added a suggestion, but this is good.

FWIW I read the use of the default policy in the same way as you do.

{{DefaultAPISidebar("Trusted Types API")}}{{AvailableInWorkers}}

The **Trusted Types API** gives web developers a way to ensure that input has been passed through a [sanitization](/en-US/docs/Web/Security/Attacks/XSS#sanitization) function before being passed to an API that might execute that input. This can help to protect against client-side [cross-site scripting (XSS)](/en-US/docs/Web/Security/Attacks/XSS) attacks.

## Concepts and usage

Client-side, or DOM-based, XSS attacks happen when data crafted by an attacker is passed to a browser API that executes that data as code. These APIs are known as _injection sinks_.

Examples of injection sinks include:

> - Functions that insert HTML into the document such as {{domxref("Element.innerHTML")}}.

Reviewer: This "Concepts and usage" section is now linked from all of the various trusted type interfaces as "injection syncs". For instance, in trusted HTML it says 

> The TrustedHTML interface of the [Trusted Types API](https://pr37917.content.dev.mdn.mozit.cloud/en-US/docs/Web/API/Trusted_Types_API) represents a string that a developer can insert into an [injection sink](https://pr37917.content.dev.mdn.mozit.cloud/en-US/docs/Web/API/Trusted_Types_API#concepts_and_usage) that will render it as HTML.

But in TrustedHtml there is no listing of what interfaces this might be used with - and if you navigate here, just this single example of `Element.innerHTML`.

This is perhaps intentional - you don't want to have a list that can't be maintained as exhaustive? I think in this case it would be useful to either list the problematic interfaces in TrustedHtml and friends, or here have a larger subset of what they are used for. You can still say "such as" even for an incomplete list.

FYI I'm looking at documenting `Document.write()` and `Document.writeln()` and when I was looking at this page, knowing this was an affected case of HTML insertion was useful.

Author: I've made two changes here from what was there before:
- removed the "injection sinks" heading
- removed a couple of the examples, specifically `outerHTML` and `document.write()`.

So pretty minor change. I haven't changed it from an exhaustive to a non-exhaustive list, it was never exhaustive. I don't want the "injection sinks" heading there, or a very long list, because I think it breaks the flow of the document.

But I do agree that it is a bit weird having the "injection sinks" link in pages like https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/TrustedScript/toString go to "concepts and usage". To address that I might suggest having an "Injection sinks" H3 heading at the end of "concepts and usage", which looks quite a bit like the existing one at https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Trusted_Types_API#injection_sinks.

Separately, yes it would be good to have an exhaustive list! But I can't find one in the [specification](https://w3c.github.io/trusted-types/dist/spec/).

Reviewer: I think even a non-exhaustive list would be useful. But appreciate you have a clear understanding of what you want to achieve. 

No worse that what was here before so OK as an edit.

Author: I do think BTW that in pages like https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Element/innerHTML we should talk about trusted types. It's unclear to me how someone can really use this API effectively without knowing exactly which APIs are governed by it. But again I don't want to do this now, because it turns into "rewrite everything".

Reviewer: Yes, I plan to do that as part of https://github.com/mdn/content/issues/37518 - discovered it had not been done yesterday.

Reviewer: Note, at this point, covering the APIs in that PR (write, writeln from Document, the setInterval/Time, Element.innerHTML, ShadowRoot.innerHTML. 
There are others that may also be affected, such as outerHTML, but I'm constraining myself in order to meet a specific FF release now overdue.

- Functions that create a new same-origin {{domxref("Document")}} with caller-controlled markup such as {{domxref("DOMParser.parseFromString()")}}.
- Functions that execute code such as {{jsxref("Global_Objects/eval", "eval()")}}.
- Setters for {{domxref("Element")}} attributes that accept a URL of code to load or execute.

> One of the main defenses against DOM-based XSS attacks is to [sanitize](/en-US/docs/Web/Security/Attacks/XSS#sanitization) data before passing it to an injection sink. The Trusted Types API enables a developer to ensure that any data passed to an injection sink has been passed through a sanitization function. It is really in two parts:

Reviewer: This is all true. Another goal is to centralise that sanitization code in one place, the defintition of the trusted types, making it easier to audit. Would be good to capture that too.

Note that the Trusted Types API does _not_ itself include a sanitization function: you supply your own function when you define the `TrustedTypePolicy` that you will use.

For example, this code creates a `TrustedTypePolicy` that can create `TrustedHTML` objects by sanitizing the input strings with the [DOMPurify](https://github.com/cure53/DOMPurify) library:

```js
const policy = trustedTypes.createPolicy("my-policy", {
  createHTML: (input) => DOMPurify.sanitize(input),
});
```

Next, you can use this `policy` object to create a `TrustedHTML` object, and pass that object into the injection sink:

```js
const userInput = "I might be XSS";
const element = document.querySelector("#container");

const trustedHTML = policy.createHTML(userInput);
element.innerHTML = trustedHTML;
```

### Using a CSP to enforce trusted types

The API described above enables you to sanitize data, but it doesn't ensure that your code never passes input directly to an injection sink: that is, it doesn't stop you passing a string into `innerHTML`.

> However, if you include the {{CSP("require-trusted-types-for")}} directive in your [CSP](/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/CSP), then passing strings into injection sinks will result in a `TypeError` exception:
> 
> ```js example-bad
> const userInput = "I might be XSS";
> const element = document.querySelector("#container");
> 
> element.innerHTML = userInput; // Throws a TypeError
> ```
> 
> Instead, you must always pass a trusted type.

Reviewer: This is mostly to my taste - a bit more active about what you do

````suggestion
In order to enforce that a trusted type must always be passed, you include the {{CSP("require-trusted-types-for")}} directive in your [CSP](/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/CSP).
With the CSP set, passing strings into injection sinks will result in a `TypeError` exception:

```js example-bad
const userInput = "I might be XSS";
const element = document.querySelector("#container");

element.innerHTML = userInput; // Throws a TypeError
```

````

Additionally, the {{CSP("trusted-types")}} CSP directive can be used to control which policies your code is allowed to create. When you create a policy using {{domxref("TrustedTypePolicyFactory/createPolicy", "trustedTypes.createPolicy()")}}, you pass a name for the policy. The `trusted-types` CSP directive lists acceptable policy names, so `createPolicy()` will throw an exception if it is passed a name which was not listed in `trusted-types`. This prevents some code in your web application from creating a policy that you were not expecting.

### The Trusted Types polyfills

The Trusted Types API is not yet available in all modern browsers, but it is usable everywhere today thanks to [polyfills created by the W3C](https://github.com/w3c/trusted-types?tab=readme-ov-file#polyfill).

There are two polyfills:

- The _API only_ polyfill defines only the JavaScript API, and does not include the ability to enforce the use of trusted types using a CSP.
- The _full_ polyfill defines the JavaScript API, attempts to infer the CSP from the current document, and enforces the use of trusted types based on the inferred CSP.

> Note that as long as you have tested your code, with trusted types enforced, in a browser that fully supports their enforcement using a CSP, you can still benefit from trusted types in other browsers even without enforcing their use in those other browsers.

Reviewer: This sentence is hard to parse.

Author: > they have nothing to do with polyfills

They do though, because they mean you don't need the full polyfill (with CSP enforcement). You can (AFAICT) get away with the tinyfill, and this is why.

Author: But I do agree that the sentence is hard and would accept suggestions!

Reviewer: > > they have nothing to do with polyfills
> 
> They do though, because they mean you don't need the full polyfill (with CSP enforcement). You can (AFAICT) get away with the tinyfill, and this is why.

Ah, there is no way to draw that conclusion from this text.

When you say "The _API only_ polyfill defines only the" - is that the tinyfill? ALso not clear.

In any case, I stand by my point that you don't need to have these three paras in here to make that point that "enforcement only has to be tested in one browser".

Upshot, structural issues to connect the dots about what you want to show.

Author: > When you say "The API only polyfill defines only the" - is that the tinyfill? ALso not clear.

No, the tinyfill is different, because it's not a polyfill for the API - i.e. it doesn't produce actual trusted types, it just produces strings. I could add an H4 heading "Tinyfill" before "The W3C also offers the following ["tinyfill"](https://github.com/w3c/trusted-types?tab=readme-ov-file#tinyfill):" if that helps make it clear that it's a different thing.

Otherwise it is tricky because the repo calls it a tinyfill not a polyfill, so I can't amend "There are two polyfills:" to "There are three polyfills:", and saying "There are two polyfills and one tinyfill:" sounds stupid.

Reviewer: Perhaps pull the tinyfill into its own heading then, with whatever is relevant to its behaviour and not everything else?That makes it easier to cover the above distinctions.

Author: OK so based on this and our conversation I have had a bit of a go at this. Hope it is clearer.

-> https://github.com/mdn/content/pull/37917/commits/36206602ed293307b197f2c87a679ccbf16ec09b

{{DefaultAPISidebar("Trusted Types API")}}{{AvailableInWorkers}}

> The **Trusted Types API** gives web developers a way to ensure that input has been passed through a [sanitization](/en-US/docs/Web/Security/Attacks/XSS#sanitization) function before being passed to an API that might execute that input. This can help to protect against client-side [cross-site scripting (XSS)](/en-US/docs/Web/Security/Attacks/XSS) attacks.

Author: I think this is a bit tricky, because in the intro paragraph saying "ensure that input has been passed through a user-specified transformation function" rather than "ensure that input has been passed through a sanitization function" is IMO quite unhelpfully abstract: as a reader I read this and go "what does that mean, and why would I want to do that?" The whole point of the API AIUI is to sanitize input, so saying that early on seems helpful.

Also the current text doesn't say that the API ensures input is sanitized, it says it enables developers to ensure input is sanitized, which seems true to me.

It is true, and important, that the API doesn't ensure that sanitization happens, but maybe it's better to state the main (happy) path first, and then to qualify it. We do already have that qualification, more or less, in https://pr37917.content.dev.mdn.mozit.cloud/en-US/docs/Web/API/Trusted_Types_API#the_trusted_types_javascript_api:

> Note that the Trusted Types API does not itself include a sanitization function: you supply your own function when you define the TrustedTypePolicy that you will use.

Would it be enough to:
- move this paragraph up a bit (not I think to the very start, but maybe to the end of the "concepts and usage" preamble)
- be a bit clearer/more emphatic that the API offers no guarantee that the function supplied is correct or even a sanitization function at all

?

> The **Trusted Types API** gives web developers a way to ensure that input has been passed through a [sanitization](/en-US/docs/Web/Security/Attacks/XSS#sanitization) function before being passed to an API that might execute that input. This can help to protect against client-side [cross-site scripting (XSS)](/en-US/docs/Web/Security/Attacks/XSS) attacks.

Reviewer 2: I think it's certainly worth a shot, thank you for your ideas!

> The **Trusted Types API** gives web developers a way to ensure that input has been passed through a [sanitization](/en-US/docs/Web/Security/Attacks/XSS#sanitization) function before being passed to an API that might execute that input. This can help to protect against client-side [cross-site scripting (XSS)](/en-US/docs/Web/Security/Attacks/XSS) attacks.

Reviewer: > The whole point of the API AIUI is to sanitize input, so saying that early on seems helpful.

FWIW the point of the API is to force all data going to a sink to be _considered for sanitization_, and make finding all the sinks easier. There are plenty of cases where you might not want or be able to do much sanitizing, such as scripts  - as per @aaronshim comment in https://github.com/mdn/content/pull/37917#discussion_r1958668942

I think your points and proposed solution are good though.

## Concepts and usage

Client-side, or DOM-based, XSS attacks happen when data crafted by an attacker is passed to a browser API that executes that data as code. These APIs are known as _injection sinks_.

Examples of injection sinks include:

- Functions that insert HTML into the document such as {{domxref("Element.innerHTML")}}.
- Functions that create a new same-origin {{domxref("Document")}} with caller-controlled markup such as {{domxref("DOMParser.parseFromString()")}}.
- Functions that execute code such as {{jsxref("Global_Objects/eval", "eval()")}}.
- Setters for {{domxref("Element")}} attributes that accept a URL of code to load or execute.

> One of the main defenses against DOM-based XSS attacks is to [sanitize](/en-US/docs/Web/Security/Attacks/XSS#sanitization) data before passing it to an injection sink. The Trusted Types API enables a developer to centralize the sanitization code and to ensure that any data passed to an injection sink has been passed through the sanitization code.

Reviewer 2: A nuance here is that sanitization only works for HTML that is being passed in to the DOM sink-- and is something we can only realistically add for the `createHTML` piece of the policy. For `createScript` and `createScriptURL`, there isn't much you can do in the sanitization space, so common strategies are primitive checks (like making sure that the URLs for `createScriptURL` is from a trusted origin, if that is consistent with your threat model) or turning off `createScript` / `createScriptURL` altogether or doing a passthrough for `createScriptURL` and relying on other security features (CSP, integrity hashes, etc).

Author: I've thought quite a bit about this and some related comments you have here and have changed things in https://github.com/mdn/content/pull/37917/commits/aae1d358c84187352f4f48722ab1e93e50cbb320. 

I had been vaguely uneasy about "sanitization" language outside the context of HTML but hadn't really considered it explicitly till read this comment. In https://github.com/mdn/content/pull/37917/commits/aae1d358c84187352f4f48722ab1e93e50cbb320 I've tried to talk about the different kinds of sinks that might want different kinds of transformation, and that only one of them is really a sanitization function.

Reviewer: I thought it was OK before, but the changes are much better/more precise.

Let's see what @aaronshim - this reads well, but I don't know how to assess the truth of things like "For JavaScript and JavaScript URL sinks, the policy may turn off the sinks entirely or allow certain predefined inputs (for example, specific URLs)."

The API has two main parts:

- A JavaScript API enables a developer to sanitize data before passing it to an injection sink.
- Two [CSP](/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/CSP) directives enforce and control the usage of the JavaScript API.

### The Trusted Types JavaScript API

In the Trusted Types API:

> - The {{domxref("Window.trustedTypes", "trustedTypes")}} global property is used to create {{domxref("TrustedTypePolicy")}} objects.

Reviewer 2: nit: Is https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/WorkerGlobalScope/trustedTypes also worth mentioning?

Author: -> https://github.com/mdn/content/pull/37917/commits/248627224fe4c33cfcd0480416b99566a9ba8cf8

> - A {{domxref("TrustedTypePolicy")}} object is used to create trusted type objects: it will do this by passing the data through a sanitization function.

Reviewer 2: nit: See comment previous about the nuance of "sanitization" vs. "user-supplied transformation"-- most of the times it should be sanitization (for `createHTML`) but it's not always the case.

> - Trusted type objects represent data that has been sanitized, and can therefore be safely passed to an injection sink. There are three sorts of trusted type, corresponding to different sort of injection sink:

Reviewer 2: data that has been explicitly passed through a developer-provided transformation to create a trust boundary, rather than "sanitized"?

  - {{domxref("TrustedHTML")}} is for passing to a sink that will render the data as HTML.
  - {{domxref("TrustedScript")}} is for passing to a sink that will execute the data as JavaScript.

>   - {{domxref("TrustedScriptURL")}} is for passing to a sink that will parse the data as a URL.

Reviewer 2: parse the data as a URL-- for the purposes of executing it as a script later?

With this API, instead of passing a string to an injection sink like `innerHTML`, you use a `TrustedTypePolicy` to create a `TrustedHTML` object from the string, then pass that into the sink, and can be sure that the string has been passed through a sanitization function.

Note that the Trusted Types API does _not_ itself include a sanitization function: you supply your own function when you define the `TrustedTypePolicy` that you will use.

For example, this code creates a `TrustedTypePolicy` that can create `TrustedHTML` objects by sanitizing the input strings with the [DOMPurify](https://github.com/cure53/DOMPurify) library:

```js
const policy = trustedTypes.createPolicy("my-policy", {
  createHTML: (input) => DOMPurify.sanitize(input),
});
```

Next, you can use this `policy` object to create a `TrustedHTML` object, and pass that object into the injection sink:

```js

> const userInput = "I might be XSS";

Reviewer 2: nit: Would it be better to style `userInput` as something that is definitely HTML markup and not just plaintext? Otherwise the "simple fix" would be `element.textContent = userInput`.

In order to enforce that a trusted type must always be passed, you include the {{CSP("require-trusted-types-for")}} directive in your [CSP](/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/CSP).
With this directive set, passing strings into injection sinks will result in a `TypeError` exception:

```js example-bad
const userInput = "<p>I might be XSS</p>";
const element = document.querySelector("#container");

element.innerHTML = userInput; // Throws a TypeError
```

Additionally, the {{CSP("trusted-types")}} CSP directive can be used to control which policies your code is allowed to create. When you create a policy using {{domxref("TrustedTypePolicyFactory/createPolicy", "trustedTypes.createPolicy()")}}, you pass a name for the policy. The `trusted-types` CSP directive lists acceptable policy names, so `createPolicy()` will throw an exception if it is passed a name which was not listed in `trusted-types`. This prevents some code in your web application from creating a policy that you were not expecting.

### The default policy

> 

Reviewer: @wbamberg This is a matter of taste, but I prefer to introduce the concept and its use before showing how it is used - in particular because this is on the migration path. So consider removing the last comment in this section and replacing it with something like (with appropriate changes to the first sentence that follows):

> A default policy can be used to help you find any places in your code where you're still using strings in your injection sinks, so you can rewrite the code to create and pass trusted types instead.
> Note that you should only use the default policy only to transition from legacy code!

Author: >  I prefer to introduce the concept and its use before showing how it is used

Yeah, I agree this is a good principle!

Author: -> https://github.com/mdn/content/pull/37917/commits/acff35ba89bb6a1abbfdbd7dd809bb4b93ab8f27

Reviewer: Looks good

```js
trustedTypes.createPolicy("default", {
  createHTML: (value) => {
    console.log("Please refactor this code");
    return sanitize(value);
  },
});
```

With this policy, if your code assigns a string to `innerHTML`, the browser will call the policy's `createHTML()` method and assign its result to the sink:

```js
const userInput = "<p>I might be XSS</p>";
const element = document.querySelector("#container");

element.innerHTML = userInput;
// Logs "Please refactor this code"
// Assigns the result of sanitize(userInput)
```

If the default policy returned `null` or `undefined`, then the browser will throw a `TypeError` when assigning the result to the sink:

```js
trustedTypes.createPolicy("default", {
  createHTML: (value) => {
    console.log("Please refactor this code");
    return null;
  },
});

const userInput = "<p>I might be XSS</p>";
const element = document.querySelector("#container");

element.innerHTML = userInput;
// Logs "Please refactor this code"
// Throws a TypeError
```

> It's recommended that you use the default policy only to transition from legacy code that passes input directly to injection sinks. That is, it helps you discover the places in your code where you're using injection sinks directly, so you can rerwite the code to create and pass trusted types instead.

Reviewer: If you choose not to do https://github.com/mdn/content/pull/37917/files#r1984217780 then typo

```suggestion
It's recommended that you use the default policy only to transition from legacy code that passes input directly to injection sinks. That is, it helps you discover the places in your code where you're using injection sinks directly, so you can rewrite the code to create and pass trusted types instead.
```

- Functions that execute code such as {{jsxref("Global_Objects/eval", "eval()")}}.
- Setters for {{domxref("Element")}} attributes that accept a URL of code to load or execute.

One of the main defenses against DOM-based XSS attacks is to [sanitize](/en-US/docs/Web/Security/Attacks/XSS#sanitization) data before passing it to an injection sink. The Trusted Types API enables a developer to centralize the sanitization code and to ensure that any data passed to an injection sink has been passed through the sanitization code.

> The API is really in two parts:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The API has two main parts:
```

- The [_API only_ polyfill](https://github.com/w3c/trusted-types/blob/main/src/polyfill/api_only.js) defines only the JavaScript API, and does not include the ability to enforce the use of trusted types using a CSP.

As well as these two polyfills, the W3C provides what it calls a _tinyfill_, which we'll explain in more detail below.

Note that as long as you have tested your code, with trusted types enforced, in one browser, then you don't necessarily need to enforce trusted types in a different browser. This means that if you have tested your website in a browser that fully supports trusted types, you can then use just the API polyfill or the tinyfill in other browsers - you don't need to use the full polyfill.

This is because, if you have enforced the use of trusted types in a browser, then you must refactor your code to ensure that all data is passed through the Trusted Types API (and therefore has been through a sanitization function) before being passed to an injection sink.

> If you then run the refactored code in a different browser without enforcement, it will still go through the same code paths, and give you the same protection.

Reviewer: @wbamberg Problem fixed but I find this section a little repetitive/laborious. A very small refactor addresses this IMO.

```suggestion
Note that as long as you have tested your code on a supporting browser with CSP enforcement enabled, then you don't need to use the _full polyfill_ above on other browsers — you can get the same benefits using the _API only polyfill_ or the _tinyfill_.

This is because the enforcement forces you to refactor your code to ensure that all data is passed through the Trusted Types API (and therefore has been through a sanitization function) before being passed to an injection sink.
If you then run the refactored code in a different browser without enforcement, it will still go through the same code paths, and give you the same protection.
```
